Date: October 31, 2022

Time: 22:00 UTC+8

Attendees: eop Chen (coordinator), Bill Mcspadden, Chris Taylor, Christoph Mullner, James Ball, JiaWei, Josh Hayford, Kito Cheng, Mihail Popa, Pan Li, Shivam Gupta, Tom Watts, Trevor Gale


## Early formation of the RVV C intrinsics TG
eop:
The Task Group is in the early formation stage [0]. We now have additional infrastructure (mailing list [1] and administrative repo. [2]) hosted under RISC-V International.

The next step would be a call for chair / vice chair of the task group that will be posted before soon.

We have a preliminary charter right now, please don't hesitate to share feedback [3].

[0] [Announcing the inception of a RISC-V Vector C intrinsics API TG](https://lists.riscv.org/g/apps-tools-software/message/274)

[1] [Mailing list](https://lists.riscv.org/g/tech-rvv-intrinsics)

[2] [Administrative repository (riscv-admin/rvv-intrinsics)](https://github.com/riscv-admin/rvv-intrinsics)

[3] [Review for the preliminary charter #1](https://github.com/riscv-admin/rvv-intrinsics/issues/1)

## Discussion on consensus to roadmap towards v1.0 for GCC and LLVM
TL;DR A consensus here that process-related issues and discussions should go back to open source community itself and the intrinsic spec should only focus on defining the intrinsics only. 

---

eop:
Currently LLVM supports what specifies as the v0.10 intrinsics in the intrinsics specification, while GCC don't have support to RVV intrinsics. GCC is targeting to support whatever would be specified to be v1.0 and disregards what is now v0.10 in the spec. The next question is on how LLVM transits its current status to the v1.0 version.

We may want to define a development process in the spec for compilers to follow for the release.

Christoph:
I would prefer that there is no intermediate steps for the transition from v0.10 to v1.0 so users won't be confused and mis-use the intermediate steps as their go-to version for rvv intrinsics.

I think the intrinsic specification should only focus on designing the v1.0 intrinsics.The discussion of how the community implements the specification should go back to the community itself. Personally I think this should not be a blocking to the aim of the task group which is the API itself.

I think we end of with one release here in the intrinsic specification. In GCC as you have mentioned is reasonable to target for only the v1.0. The discussion of how LLVM adapts users from v0.10 to v1.0 should be brought back to the LLVM community. 

eop:
I think thats reasonable. The discussion would be moved to the LLVM RISC-V call.

Kito:
Regarding processes, I think we could just suggest those in the open source community and the spec don't restrict any kinds of process to the communities and focus on the API itself.
Regarding PR "Add macro to imply compiler availability on intrinsic versions #173"
eop:
The PR is for the compiler to imply on what version of intrinsics it is supporting. So it is expected in LLVM's next (year-end) release that the macro will imply a support to v0.10 and in the next-next release which would be in similar timeline to GCC's release, it would be in-sync with GCC, supporting the v1.0 intrinsics.

Christoph:
Should this be documented in riscv-c-api-doc [0] rather than this repository?

Kito:
Right now there is already some macro-s defined in RVV intrinsics that is not inside riscv-c-api-doc. So I guess it's ok for now we have this under rvv-intrinsic-doc [1].

[0] [riscv-non-isa/riscv-c-api-doc](https://github.com/riscv-non-isa/riscv-c-api-doc)

[1] [riscv-non-isa/rvv-intrinsic-doc](https://github.com/riscv-non-isa/rvv-intrinsic-doc)

## Statistics from Kito Cheng to Nick Knight's simplification proposal

Please refer to the meeting slide above for the full statistic. In conclusion the simplification [0] saves ~ 25% of intrinsics in total but breaks compatibility for all existing non-policy masked intrinsics.

[0] [Nick's simplification proposal](https://gist.github.com/nick-knight/6cb0b74b351a25323dfb1821d3a269b9)

## Discussion on naming scheme

TL;DR Discussion converges towards to adapt a naming scheme for the intrinsics so we can avoid any big incompatible change in the future. Kito suggested that maybe "__rv_" would be a good prefix. We may not want to include extension names because some extension names are difficult to abbreviate and will look ugly.

Main reason: Avoid function name polution

---

Christoph:
I think it is reasonable we have a common naming scheme for all intrinsics. The question was raised for scalar crypto intrinsics but it didn't survive the discussion [0]. This topic attracts attention again because of the RVV intrinsics.

eop:
This may require a consensus across extensions. Maybe the Toolchain & Runtime SIG should gather agreement across extensions first then come back to each intrinsic task group to discuss on renaming the intrinsics. We can have the intrinsics with naming scheme prefix added as alias when the SIG comes back with a consensus.

Kito:
I think we may want to start to adapt the naming scheme since its a good timing considering the v1.0 and we don't want big incompatible changes in the future.

[0] [riscv-non-isa/riscv-c-api-doc#25](https://github.com/riscv-non-isa/riscv-c-api-doc/pull/25)