Date: November 28, 2022

Time: 23:00 UTC+8

Attendees: eop Chen (coordinator, SiFive), Kito Cheng (SiFive), Roger Ferrer Ibanez (BSC), JiaWei (PLCT), Nick Knight(SiFive), Xuan Hu (ICT), Robin Lu (PLCT), Jojo R(T-Head), Shiha Liao (PLCT), Christoph Mullner (Vrull), Mark Himelstein(RVI), Zi-Fei Zhang (ICT), Rafael Sene (RVI), Ed Jones (Embecosm), Jeff Scheel (RVI), Oria

## Adding rounding mode control to the RVV intrinsics (part 1)

The discussion of the rounding mode was mentioned at the very start of the meeting, and then we re-iterated back with Nick introducing the proposal that is currently drafted but not yet distributed. This meeting note is documented with respect to the time sequence, and the "part 2" of this topic is in the last section of this note.

---

TL;DR

With the concern of the whole RISC-V ecosystem and to make it successful, the proposal to be landed into the specification should be required to look out for existing software ecosystem and its corresponding use-case (or efforts needed) of the proposal.

As a side note to supporting rounding mode control in the intrinsics, there are other ISA-s that have control to rounding mode or saturation bit (like AVX-512[1, 2] and ACLE Q flag[3]), we have prior work for the proposal and not creating anything new here.

---

eop: First of all, on what we have talked about in the previous meetings, a fixed-point/floating-point proposal that would cover the functionality incompleteness right now, regarding the rounding mode and saturations (exception flags), there are some internal workloads that we have to deal with within SiFive. We don't have a written proposal right now, but I see that Nick is here today. Nick would you like to share more about the proposal or we can go through the agenda first?

Nick: Yes I have a proposal with the floating-point/fixed-point rounding modes and I am still polishing up the proposal for handling floating-point exception flags and fixed-point saturation bit. I can talk through them in words but I would be happy to talk about the rounding modes today which I think is the more important one.

eop: I see. Maybe we will come back later when we go through other bullet points in the agenda today?

Mark: I have a question, are these commenced with other architectures or are these new things?

Nick: Existing intrinsics proposals [0] of RVV does not expose all of the features in the ISA, some of this is intentional and some of this was just based on time we had to deal with this in the past. What I am proposing is exposing more of the ISA to the C programmer. In terms of comparing with other ISA-s, historically it sort of differs by the ISA, because different ISA has different functionality. For example in a very recent release of the AVX-512 intrinsics for Intel [1, 2], they added a rounding mode control to the intrinsics. Historically the rounding mode was set through a separate instruction. Historically, the Arm NEON has a Q (saturation) flag [3], but they have deprecated that more recently. There are other prior works in different ISA-s but they are not a perfect match to what we have here in RVV.

Mark: Do programmers use these directly or do they use these through a library?

Nick: It is our understanding that most users of the intrinsics are advanced programmers, the kind of people who would do library development, most users are probably not using intrinsics at all. It is really more for the advanced users who wants to get closer to the hardware. Once you use intrinsics, you are fundamentally using RISC-V specifically.

Mark: Are there any open source libraries, that we may want to include them in the proof-of-concept to the addition of this functionality?

Nick: These intrinsics were first released in the wild in late 2019, there are actually quite a large codebase using these intrinsics since the several iterations of the intrinsics. I have noticed code in PLCT of these intrinsics through some additional wrappers. I have also noticed some project from China using these intrinsics for FFTW. I don't know if any of these projects in the wild can be count as a proof-of-concept, but yes these intrinsics are useful to the open projects.

Mark: I agree what you are doing, I just want to make sure the proposal takes existing open source projects into account and make sure they can take advantage of them. If not, it may mean that there are more work needed to be done for review and public ratification, or it means that more work is need to be done "beyond" freeze and ratification, in terms of the overall software ecosystem. Please keep that in mind when throwing out a proposal.

Nick: I think that is more of a decision to be done for the whole task group than be done by me personally. This TG will discuss about this while going forward. I appreciate your feedback.

Mark: We should put that in a parking lot somewhere so we don't lose track of this.

Nick: Yes, eop would you add this to the meeitng so we can keep in mind for any open source projects that are needed if any to this proposal that will be able to demonstrate to functionality added.

Mark: Or whatever is needed to be done in order to cover this business.

Nick: So the biggest thing I might have opinion is that the implementation in the compiler, in LLVM and hopefully GCC. That is absolutely crucial on my opinion.

Mark: Great, thank you.

eop: Regarding the requirement of landing into the specification, the on-going PR that is discussing about this only specifies a proof-of-concept of the compiler implementation is required to have the change be merged into the specification. We don't have requirement on concerns to the existing software ecosystems that are the users of the intrinsics. Further more regarding to the concerns of rounding mode, I am afraid that since is not a well-exposed functionality, we don't have existing users to prove that it works, because existing users are forced to control them by inline assembly, right. So Mark, I mean we have a difficulty here for the current proposal we are talking about, to have a proof-of-concept in the software ecosystem other than the compiler implementation.

Mark: There is difference in POC needed for the freeze and ratification from the POC to have the software ecosystem involved. They both have to be specified in a plan. So when you go to a chair, you must have a plan for both of them. That should be at least mentioned in a paragraph somewhere, to make people know that you are watching out for the ecosystem and understand what needs to be done. It also enables the chance for development partners to recruit efforts that would require on doing updates to the intrinsics.

eop: Ok, I will try to do that and gather any open comments on this.

Mark: Everyone, please keep in mind that you are the line of defense that members are successful, just think of the wholistic story of what needs to be done, it doesn't that it needs to be done immediately, but just keep that in mind.

eop: Ok, thank you Mark.

[0] The existing intrinsics proposal, which is lying under the latest `master` branch of `rvv-intrinsic-doc`, is considered the latest proposal towards the first official release of the RISC-V Vector C intrinsics. The existing proposal is currently supported by Clang (LLVM), including 4 sets of intrinsics, "non-overloading intrinsics with default policy behavior", "non-overloading intrinsics with control to the policy behavior", "overloading intrinsics with default policy behavior", and "overloading intrinsics with control to the policy behavior.

[1] [Enhanced Vector Math Support on the Intel速AVX-512 Architecture
](https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/8464794)

[2] [Intel速 C++ Compiler Classic Developer Guide and Reference
Development Reference Guides, Intrinsics for Intel速 Advanced Vector Extensions 512 (Intel速 AVX-512) Instructions - Example: Embedded Rounding and Suppress All Exceptions (SAE)](https://www.intel.com/content/www/us/en/develop/documentation/cpp-compiler-developer-guide-and-reference/top/compiler-reference/intrinsics/intrinsics-for-avx-512-instructions.html)

[3] [acle-2022Q4.pdf](https://github.com/ARM-software/acle/releases/download/r2022Q4/acle-2022Q4.pdf), under section "5.4.7 Q (saturation) flag", the specification stated, "Intrinsics associated with the Q-bit and their feature macro `__ARM_FEATURE_QBIT` are deprecated in ACLE 2.0 for A-profile. They are fully supported for M-profile and R-profile. This macro is defined for AArch32 only."

## Call for comments on incompatibility change

eop: I see a few new participants today, regarding the incompatiblity change for simplification of the intrinsics that we have started recently, there hasn't been many comments on this. Does anyone have any comment on this? If so, now is a great time to speak up.

(10 seconds of silence)

eop: Well then let's start the agenda today.

## On supporting the tuple-types for segment load/store intrinsics

TL;DR An overall conclusion is that we should have the primitive tuple types limited and well-defined for the use of segmenet load/store intrinsics. 

The discussion of supporting a sizeless struct, which now RVV is the second scalable extension that wants this, makes a stronger case to the proposal and can be raised again. However this discussion can be deferred for later after v1.0.

---

eop: Issue was raised that we can have a tuple type for segment load/store. Within discussion with Kito, we think that we can have primitive tuple types for the segment load/store intrinsics. What I am proposing here is that we can have GCC implementation as a proof-of-concept and have LLVM catch up on this before the next release because right now we have some implementation difficulty and we may need time to catch up.

Since there has been a lot of comment suggesting to support tuple types for segment load/store, I think it is an important feature that we can consider in the v1.0 release. I want to raise discussion here to see if there is any opinions on this, to see if people agree or disagree. I personally agrees that we should include this into the specification in v1.0.

Nick: I think a question I have is on the limits on this. In the ISA, there is a contraint of vector registers in a "tuple",  that product of `LMUL` and `NFIELDS` is less or equal to 8. On the other hand, there might be use case where you want a tuple of LMUL 8, which will not be covered by the type system you are talking about right now. I think the question I have is that is this a general concept of tuples of vectors or is it specifically for segment load/store?

eop: I think the intent right now would be having the tuple types specifically for segment load/store as a better convention and interface for using segment load/store. That should be clearly defined so we don't violate anything from the spec.

Kito: Just curious Nick, what are the specific use case for your tuple of 2 LMUL 8?

Nick: I think this goes beyond the current proposal, not only for segment load/store but generally for all vectorized functions. The limitation I am discussing is the inability to have these vector types into structures. The original proposal from Richard Sandiford [0, 1] for Arm SVE included this notion of a "sizeless struct" which ran into friction from the LLVM folks, and was eventually dropped in the compiler and now Arm SVE does not support vector types in struct. The idea is when a function wants to return multiple vectors and one way of doing that is to have a struct, basically a tuple of vectors. This could be done to an extend of this proposal but it would run into the limitation by the ISA. This is just a comment here and I don't want to derail the conversation.

eop: I think supporting the sizeless struct will be very useful for the programmers, but as you mentioned the proposal was rejected by the LLVM community. However now since RISC-V is the second scalable vector ISA to propose such concept, I think the conversation can be restarted again.

Regarding what we are working towards, to v1.0 specification, I think such discussion can be deferred out of the scope of this. I think we should work on that later.

Nick: I agree, I think that is a reasonable proposal.

[0] [RFC: C and C++ extension to support variable-length register-sized vector types](https://lists.llvm.org/pipermail/cfe-dev/2018-May/057830.html), posted in 2018 May

[1] [RFC: Adding vscale vector types to C and C++](https://lists.llvm.org/pipermail/cfe-dev/2019-June/062523.html), posted in 2019 June to invoke the issue.

## On development-related PR previously proposed (#171)

The conclusion is that the development process for LLVM to transit current users to the next v1.0 release will be delegated to the LLVM community.

## Adding a fixed-length attribute in RVV (#176)

eop: An issue has been raised about having a fixed-length specification of the vector length so that existing SIMD libraries can transit onto RVV.

Kito: There are the GNU attributes of alignment [0] that is generic and the target-specific VLS option like the SVE [1]. Which one do you specifically want to extend.

eop: I think the latter one is what the person that raised the issue wants to propose.

Kito: I think we can discuss further when a concrete proposal is distributed in the public first.

## On drafting the intrinsic spefication (#179)

eop: An issue was raised on where is the actual specification that will be proposed. Since the official "chair" of this task group is still undetermined, there is still a vacant on who will be the main editor of this specification. As the current coordinator of the task group, if possible, I would like to take responsibility for drafting and be the main editor of the intrinsic specification.

Mark: As acting chair, you may consider yourself currently as the chair of the task group. Please feel free to act whatever a chair does as if.

On the other hand, it doesn't necessary be the chair that is the main editor of the specification. It is on the task group to decide on that.

## Adding rounding mode control to the RVV intrinsics (part 2)

Only writing down short summary of what Nick has introduced here, because the full proposal will soon be distributed into the open.

### Floating-point intrinsics regarding frm

- Existing intrinsics, which will be viewed as the implict floating-point intrinsics, will respect the dynamic rounding mode CSD `frm` just like corresponding scalar floating point operations.
- Newly added intrinsics, will allow users to have the instruction performed with the explict rounding modes specified.

### Fixed-point intrinsics regarding vxrm

- Existing intrinsics, which are fixed-point intrinsics that is just using whatever is in the vxrm register, are proposed to be removed from the spec. The main claim is that the intrinsics programmers, assumed to be advanced users, should statically know what rounding mode it should be configuring. Leaving the existing intrinsics rather less useful after the explicit rounding mode fixed-point intrinsics are added in the future.
- Newly added intrinsics, will allow users to have the instruction performed with the explict rounding modes specified.

### On the design decision of the interfaces of these intrinsics

TL;DR The rounding mode is encoded in the function name, just like SEW, LMUL, VTA, and VMA that are static knowledge known to the intrinsic programmers.

---

Roger: Have you considered the rounding mode as an input parameter, compared to statically encoding the rounding modes in the function prototype? This would allow us to only have one extra set compared to four extra sets of the floating-point rounding mode intrinsics.

Nick: Good question. Like the current interface we have, with the SEW, LMUL, VTA, and VMA informations encoded into the function name, we can also allow these configurations to be parameterized into the function, like what we are doing for `vl`. That simplifies the intrinsics name, but it doesn't hide the complexity that much in the sense that the argument is still exposed and require configuration.

You are absolutely right that there are multiple options here for the design. `frm` and `vxrm` are essentially what the programmers will know statically, which wants control to the rounding mode. Our feeling is that we should match the approach for "static knowledge", like the SEW, LMUL information and have them inside the function name, as opposed to `vl`, which is a dynamic quantity that is not known at compile time.

I think in the future after v1.0, when we are discussing further about a C++ API, we can revisit this decision because a lot of this can be done with templates.

Roger: We could enforce in the compiler that the parameters always have to be a constant thing, but I agree, just like you have mentioned, that the users of the intrinsics are advanced programmers so I am comfortable with your justification.
