Date: April 17th, 2023

Time: 22:00 UTC+8

Attendees: eop Chen (coordinator), Kito Cheng, Nick Knight, Roger Ferrer Ibanez, Trevor Gale, Paul Sherman, Philip Reames, Jeff Scheel, Joshua, JojoR, Du Ha Quang, Isaac Chute, Zoubo Tai

## Progress for "Reinterpret cast intrinsics between vector boolean and LMUL=1 (m1) vector integer values"

The specification PR [0] has been merged two weeks ago. At the moment of this meeting minutes, the reinterpret cast implementation [1] has been merged into LLVM upstream.

[0] https://github.com/riscv-non-isa/rvv-intrinsic-doc/pull/221

[1] https://reviews.llvm.org/D149642

## Progress for "Tuple type to improve the segment load/store interface"

Currently the specification PR [0] has addressed all comments in the pull request. The first critical patch [1] in LLVM that allows offsets to model scalable vector members is accepted by Craig Topper, still waiting for Nikita Popov to see if he has any further questions.

The plan after landing of the first critical patch would be to land the POC patch-set, which is integer SEW=32 segment load/store. Then follow-up with another patch-set that adds all the rest of the variants and remove the current non-tuple interface.

Confirm from Kito that GCC has implemented and merged the tuple type segment load/store intrinscis to the master.

[0] https://github.com/riscv-non-isa/rvv-intrinsic-doc/pull/198

[1] https://reviews.llvm.org/D146872

## Progress for "Model rounding mode for fixed-point intrinsics"

Currently the specification PR [0] is proposing to add an extra parameter instead of the originally proposed to static encode the rounding modes into the function name.

The implementation of LLVM and GCC is still work in progress.

[0] https://github.com/riscv-non-isa/rvv-intrinsic-doc/pull/222

## Ratification plan status

We are currently still on track for the targeted 06/26 specification freeze [0] (pg. 6 of the meeting slide).

[0] [Meeting slides - 2023/05/15](https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1oxBySH5GdMDqZk2RL7enEMaChTOCLS2R2KmaZmLP7eU/edit?usp=sharing)

## Extended discussions

### Sizeless structs

Nick: I am still thinking about the future outlook of this feature as I see we are working our way to support tuple types for segment load/store.

Philip: The critical patch to model offsets of scalable structure in an aggregate type is expected to land [0]. However I think the major problem here is to have a strong motivation from the users for this feature, since this will definitely be a complex problem to tackle in the compiler side.

[0] https://reviews.llvm.org/D146872

### BFloat16 support

Note: This is not mentioned during the meeting because Joshua was not able to speak. He has started the discussion in the mailing list. Currently PR has also been open on rvv-intrinsic-doc [1].

eop is suggesting to wait for ratification of the bfloat16 extension before considering including this in the v1.0 intrinsics specification.

[0] https://lists.riscv.org/g/tech-rvv-intrinsics/message/56

[1] https://github.com/riscv-non-isa/rvv-intrinsic-doc/pull/229
