Date: April 17th, 2023

Time: 23:00 UTC+8

Attendees: eop Chen (coordinator), Kito Cheng, Nick Knight, Roger Ferrer Ibanez, Aditya Kumar, Anton Afansyev, Pan Li, Juzhe Zhong, Rafael Sene, Richard Fuhler

## Progress for feature "Tuple type to improve segment load/store interface"

eop:
Regarding current progress for the feature, the reviewal process is taking longer than expected. The date of completeness for this feature will be extended to one month later.

Currently in LLVM, the critical change [0] is still under review, while the rest of the patch-set has a proof-of-concept covering the targeted changes. I will fill up the rest of the detail after the first critical change is landed.

[0] https://reviews.llvm.org/D146872

## Change of next meeting time

eop:
Daylight saving time has started, the meeting will be shifted 1 hour earlier to 22:00 UTC+8 / 07:00 PST next month (05/15). The calender is changed to reflect this.

## Ratification plan status

eop:
Due to the delay of the progress of the tuple type feature. The targeted finish date of all v1.0 features is postponed 2 weeks later to 06/26.

The following estimating dates of completion is changed:

- Tuple type as primitive type for segment load / store: changed from 04/17 to 05/17
- Mask interpretation between m1 reg with non-boolean types and mask registers (#156) no change
- Rounding mode for fixed-point and floating-point intrinsics: changed from 05/29 to 06/12
- Polish the document: changed from 06/12 to 06/26.

Lesson learned here is that I was too optimistic on the convergence in reviewal for the changes in the tuple type feature.

## Extended discussions

### Reference pointer for the v0.11 version specificaiton of the RVV intrinsics

Kito:
We need a branch under the intrinsic specification repository (rvv-intrinsic-doc) [0] so GCC release branches can use it as a reference of what version the compiler is supporting.

Note: At the time this meeting minute is written, the branch `v0.11.x` [1] is created and the GCC [2] release notes uses the branch as a reference.

[0] https://github.com/riscv-non-isa/rvv-intrinsic-doc/tree/master

[1] https://github.com/riscv-non-isa/rvv-intrinsic-doc/tree/v0.11.x

[2] https://gcc.gnu.org/onlinedocs/gcc/RISC-V-Vector-Intrinsics.html#RISC-V-Vector-Intrinsics

### Request on opening up a PR for rounding mode intrinsics

Juzhe Zhong requests to have the proposed intrinsics be posted as a pull request under the intrinsics specification repository so he can start his development.

### Question on vector ABI discussion status

Nick Knight asked that if there are any on-going discussion or threads regarding the vector calling convention.

Kito pointed out in the meeting slides of the previous psABI meeting [0] that SiFive now has prepared engineering resource to develop and specify the official vector ABI. He plans to report the new proposal in the next psABI meeting. PoC of the vector ABI propoal is expected to be distributed on 05/01 and experiment results of the proposal is expected to be completed on 05/19.

[0] [psABI TG Meeting 2023/04/03](https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/18PpwD9fuw8SjM_6sGU5GgK1zTYf-RguR5fbmmgQrK0U/edit#slide=id.g212a8311f13_0_51)

### Ping on review for GCC intrinsic test cases

Pan Li requested for reviews on the pull request of the GCC intrinsic test cases. For more context, GCC 13 supports the v0.11 intrinsics except the segment load/store intrinsics. GCC does not includes the unit test within the toolchain (unlike LLVM) and hopes to link to the specification repository for the unit tests. Currently a development branch `gcc13-supported-gnu-test` [0] under rvv-intrinsic-doc holds the supported test cases for GCC 13. This is targeted to be merged into `v0.11.x` after verificaiton.

[0] https://github.com/riscv-non-isa/rvv-intrinsic-doc/tree/gcc13-supported-gnu-test

### Status for vector crypto intrinsics

Nick Knight asked about the status and plans for vector crypto intrinsics, especially how are we going to do with the concept of "vector element group".

eop gave context that Brandon from SiFive currently has a experimental patch developing upstream [0] and the patch does not model the larger element width data type grouped by "vector element group".

Nick points out that the intrinsics the patch is proposing also has implicit assumption on vl is multiply of the element group size. Need to state clearly and reach consensus on this. The main point he want to make is that the notion of "vector element group" may also be used for other complex computations, we need to make sure v1.0 and further can be forward compatible on this.

[0] https://reviews.llvm.org/D138810

### Status for fixed length attribute for RVV

Nick Knight asked about the current status of fixed length attribute for RVV.

This is currently not a feature for RVV intrinsics v1.0, but currently Craig from SiFive is working on a patch [0] in LLVM.

[0] https://reviews.llvm.org/D145088
