Date: March 20, 2023

Time: 23:00 UTC+8

Attendees: eop Chen (coordinator), Kito Cheng, Nick Knight, Roger Ferrer Ibanez, Aditya Kumar, Anton Afansyev

## Compatible header for v0.10

The compatible header [0] for v0.10 now supports legacy overloaded intrinsics too after amendment that was recently merged. Now the compatible header should "FULLY" cover the legacy intrinsics.

[0] https://github.com/riscv-non-isa/rvv-intrinsic-doc/tree/master/auto-generated/rvv-v0p10-compatible-headers

## Delay of the implementation for tuple types and the adjusted plan

eop:
During the past month I was busy perfecting the compatible header and other internal work loads. So the implementation of the tuple types in LLVM has not been done today (03/20) as we have targeted. I think we should extend our due date for the tuple types 4 more weeks. This implies a frozen specification will be more likely to happen at the beginning of June.

(Thanks Nick for mentioning the missing item under the issue threads. We have #156 [0] to be left to be added into the specification and #203 [1] to be explicitly clarified in the document.)

(Please see the page 5 of the meeting slide [2] for the revised ratification plan)

[0] [riscv-non-isa/rvv-intrinsic-doc#156](https://github.com/riscv-non-isa/rvv-intrinsic-doc/issues/156)

[1] [riscv-non-isa/rvv-intrinsic-doc#203](https://github.com/riscv-non-isa/rvv-intrinsic-doc/issues/203)

[2] [03/20 meeting slide](https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1WBds88jej2N4qpDT--tqDiBCTSq2Gs57MJASlJ9W54E/edit)

### Alignment of LLVM 16 and GCC 13 to support v0.11

eop:
Originally we had a tight schedule because we want to have a frozen specification and have GCC to support the to-be-ratified v1.0 RVV C intrinsic specification. Now that this plan has been extended, I think we may not be possible to do this. I expect that GCC 13 will support what is tagged as v0.11 right now and be aligned with what LLVM 16. Kito may you confirm on this.

Kito:
Yes. GCC will be aligned with the intrinsics that what LLVM has now, except the segment load store intrinsics.

eop: 
Does that imply that GCC will also face the incompatibility when we support explicit rounding mode intrinsics and the existing fixed-point intrinsics will be seen as redundant and removed?

Kito:
On the other hand, on the GCC side, I think we will want a deprecation process for this. Probably with some pragma magic.

## Extended discussions

### Extra topic from Aditya

Aditya raised an issue on the perservation of the x18 register across different platforms. This is more of a psABI-related issue (which he file an issue [0] after the meeting), that will be further resolved in the psABI TG.

[0] [riscv-non-isa/riscv-elf-psabi-doc#370](https://github.com/riscv-non-isa/riscv-elf-psabi-doc/issues/370)

### C++ intrinsics wrappers

Nick Knight shared his thoughts about his current work in progress on drafting a proposal for a C++ intrinsic wrapper.

---

Nick: I'm putting an internal C++ wrapper proposal to SiFive since we have 4 different wrappers to the intrinsics and it seems like a good idea to reduce the amount of variants out there.

The point is everyone is going to develop their own "by-reference" semantic so the wrapper operates like assembly language.

I think this doesn't need to be SiFive specific problem, I would be happy to share a wrapper.

eop: I don't know if this topic actually matches what this task group aims for. Another question is that we can share our wrappers, but at the end of the day, people also have their freedom to write their own wrappers. So is there a point in standardizing it somewhere for RISC-V?

Nick: It really a slippery slope here. Since Jan from Google has the Highway that aims to be a vector wrapper that can be cross-platform and cover Arm SVE and RISC-V at the same time.

The second you start a wrapper people would want to introduce new layers of abstractions on it.

In the short term my goal is to resolve the problem in my team, at least to reduce (or unite) the usage of a C++ intrinsic wrapper. In the end, we may be slipping down the slippery slope to what highway is doing now.
