Date: June 12th, 2023

Time: 22:00 UTC+8

Attendees: Eop Chen (coordinator), Kito Cheng, Nick Knight, Roger Ferrer Ibanez, Isaac Chute, JoJoR, Du Ha Quang, Jeff Scheel, Guo Ren

## Status of remaining features for v1.0

There are three features left to complete what we have guaranteed for RISC-V Vector C Intrinsics v1.0.

1. Improving segment load/store intrinsics to use tuple types.
- The specification PR [0] has been merged.
- LLVM has merged the proof-of-concept patch-set [1]. The full support patch-set [2] is under review.
- GCC has fully implemented the feature [3].
2. Model rounding mode control in fixed-point intrinsics.
- The specification PR [4] is still open.
- LLVM has a proof-of-concept patch-set [5] under review.
- GCC has fully implemented the feature [6].
3. Model rounding mode control in floating-point intrinsics.
- The specification PR [7] is still open.
- LLVM implementation has not started.
- GCC implementation is work-in-progress.

[0] https://github.com/riscv-non-isa/rvv-intrinsic-doc/pull/198

[1] https://reviews.llvm.org/D146872

[2] https://reviews.llvm.org/D152069

[3] https://github.com/vathpela/gcc/commit/6313b0457394172b13978b9772d49eea1d68d3a1

[4] https://github.com/riscv-non-isa/rvv-intrinsic-doc/pull/222

[5] https://reviews.llvm.org/D151395

[6] https://github.com/nstester/gcc/commit/01d62e9b6c3e9fd3132f1616843103ccf81778ed

[7] https://github.com/riscv-non-isa/rvv-intrinsic-doc/pull/226

## Compatibility support regarding v0.11 to v1.0

During the transition from v0.10 to v0.11, we provided a compatible header for users to migrate their intrinsics to the newer version. However, there is a technical difficulty in following the same approach regarding the tuple type interface. Additionally, there is a question about which rounding mode the v0.11 intrinsics should be fixed to when moving forward to v1.0.

The good news is that the function names of tuple type segment load/store intrinsics and fixed-point intrinsics will not conflict with the intrinsics that we are deprecating in v0.11. Therefore, we can easily allow both v0.11 and v1.0 intrinsics to coexist in the compiler.

eop: I think I am able to provide a patch targeting the next LLVM release.

eop: I imagine that we can have another label within the compiler for the v0.11 fixed-point intrinsics, and let the insert CSR read/write pass recognize it and not insert any rounding mode write.

Kito: Just to confirm, are you talking about something like a "dynamic rounding mode," or are you indicating something that is within the compiler itself?

eop: I am just sharing how I can implement the compatibility support for the v0.11 fixed-point intrinsics.

Kito: Got it. I thought we had discussed and ruled out the idea of modeling the "dynamic rounding mode."

## Discussion on issue: Renaming vundefine to vnull

eop: Rich Fuhler raised this question in the mailing list, but he is not present here today. To summarize, he is asking if we need to rename it because we can type fewer characters for the intrinsic. Personally, I think we already have miscellaneous suffixes of SEW, LMUL, and policies, so I believe the marginal benefit of this change won't be significant.

Kito: I think the benefit of changing the name is not too significant, and we could also consider using vundef instead.

Nick: Is there a significant use case right now for vundefine in the intrinsics?

eop: I think not. The original intent for vundefine was to have it in the maskedoff parameter of the intrinsics, and the compiler should be able to toggle the policy to agnostic when recognizing this. However, with the new policy scheme, I think it is not as useful anymore.

Kito: Actually, I think there is still a use case when we are doing vset.

Du Ha (in Zoom chat): "Null" has a different meaning than "undefine".

Nick: I agree with what Du Ha said in the chat. The term "null" already has a meaning in C, and what we really mean here is just a "undefined" value. Personally, I am also slightly opposed to the idea. I don't see much benefit in making the change.

## Ratification plan status

Due to the current implementation status, we need to extend the target date once again.

- Tuple type improvement: from 05/17 to 06/19
- Rounding mode for fixed-point: from 06/12 to 07/10
- Rounding mode for floating-point: from 06/12 to 07/10
- Polish document and freeze: from 06/26 to 08/07

Kito: Just to remind you, since the adjusted dates go across July, the LLVM branch-out date is July 4th. So, I think you should consider another v0.12 tag if you can't get all the features listed above implemented.

eop: Thank you for the reminder. I will keep this issue in mind.
