Date: August 8th, 2023

Time: 22:00 UTC+8

Attendee: eop Chen (coordinator), Kito Cheng, Liang Huayue, Jose Moreira, Jim Lin, JojoR, Nick Knight

## Status for remaining features in v1.0

The remaining item left before v1.0 is to polish and revamp the specification based on changes of the RVV intrinsics in the past 2 years. There is an on-going pull request [0]. Currently the pull request is working on to address reviewers' comments and add Github workflow to produce a snapshot PDF when there is a change to the specification contents.

eop: I personally expect the pull request of specification revamp to be landed within a week from today. After that we can declare the specification to be frozen and open for public review.

[0] [The RISC-V vector intrinsics v1.0 specification #248](https://github.com/riscv-non-isa/rvv-intrinsic-doc/pull/248)

## Ratification plan status

As shown in the slide [0], all engineering that required features has been landed into the specification. Regarding the status of upstream support, LLVM supported all of them, while GCC has the floating-point rounding mode intrinsics left to be done.

[0] [Road to RVV C Intrinsic API v1.0 - 2023/08/07](https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1bYvkS4qEwssjXWZ-nW_45_KThvVF1Vyc9rR_uw1ydGs/edit?usp=sharing)

## AOB

### An internal review from the chairs first before going to the public

Jeff: It has been a convention we will have the specifications go through an internal round of review from the tech chairs before going to the public. It is not a hard requirement, but I suggest us to do this here too. Please checkout the RISC-V life cycle guide [0] for more.

eop: Thank you for notifying me about this. I will do so before going frozen and public review.

[0] [RISC-V Lifecycle Guide](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1Au3veNdNJQKPq-oiQRKTzdgmM72FDaqZOKeH7sOnG04/edit?usp=sharing)
