Date: June 12th, 2023

Time: 22:00 UTC+8

Attendee: eop Chen (coordinator), Kito Cheng, Nick Knight, Roger Ferrer Ibanez, YiXuan Chen, Michal Terepeta, Rich Fuhler, Jeff Scheel

## Status for remaining features in v1.0

The remaining engineering feature to be implemented is the floating-point intrinscis that models the control of the rounding mode (`frm`).

At the moment of this meeting minutes, the implementation of the `frm` intrinsics are added into the LLVM trunk [0].

The GCC implementation is work-in-progress.

[0] https://reviews.llvm.org/D154628

## Ratification plan status

With at least LLVM implementing the intrinsics to model floating-point rounding mode control. After the specification PR [0] is merged into `master`, we can proceed to the last item on polishing the intrinsics document.

Jeff mentioned in the meeting that a formal RISC-V ratified document are written in ASCIIDoc format, and the intrinsics specification will too.

[0] https://github.com/riscv-non-isa/rvv-intrinsic-doc/pull/226

## LLVM 17 branch out in 07/25

The LLVM 17 is going to branch out on 07/25. LLVM now supports all features that is targeted for v1.0, but the document has not been revamped yet. The specification will still need to branch out a `v0.12` as a point of reference for the LLVM 17 release.

In short, we will have a `v0.12` label created, but except for document improvement, `v0.12` will be no different from what will be `v1.0`.

The GCC does an annual and still has several months, so we don't need worry about it now.

## Extended discussions

### Intrinsic viewer found in the open source

Eop found an interesting site providing a up-to-date searching interface for the RVV intrinsics. Done by Dzaima from Latvia.

https://dzaima.github.io/intrinsics-viewer/

### When do we pick up intrinsics for vector crypto, NTLH, and also BF16?

Nick raised a question on when we pick up other extensions that builds upon the vector architecture.

To list them out explicitly, there are the vector crypto, NTLH, and BF16 extension that is yet to be addressed.

The short conclusion during the meeting is that this will be the first thing we revisit after RVV intrinsics v1.0 is done.

### Intrinsics for FP16

Nick raised a question on the status of FP16 RVV intrinsics support in the upstream compilers.

In LLVM, vector FP16 was started to be supported several releases agon since FP16 was once a subset of the "V" extension, and was implemented into the LLVM compiler at the time. In the later updated "V" extension, vector FP16 was separated as `zvfh` / `zvfhmin` [0].

Kito shared that in the latest GCC trunk, GCC has also added FP16 RVV intrinsics support.

[0] [zvfh/zvfhmin spec](https://drive.google.com/file/d/1_Yt60HGAf1r1hx7JnsIptw0sqkBd9BQ8/view)

### Update specification after landing of `<riscv_int.h>`

Under `riscv-c-api-doc`, there is on-going PR [0] to formalize a header file to declare a RISC-V specific type that maps the `XLEN` configuration. 

Nick took vcpop as an example, and suggests that we should update the intrinsics specification after the PR has landed so the intrinsics can have a "RISC-V type" returned in case of any future ABI issue.

Kito shared that the PR and compiler implementation will be done soon.

[0] https://github.com/riscv-non-isa/riscv-c-api-doc/pull/14
