Date: September 5th, 2023

Time: 22:00 UTC+8

Attendee: eop Chen (coordinator), Anton Sidorenko, Kito Chen, Michal Terepeta, Rich Fuhler, Roger Ferrer Ibanez, Rufus, Victor Lu, Joshua

## Recent changes of the intrinsics specification

Here are the recent changes to that are landed for the intrinsics specification.

[The RISC-V vector intrinsics v1.0 specification #248](https://github.com/riscv-non-isa/rvv-intrinsic-doc/pull/248)
- Revamps the intrinsics specification from Markdown to ASCIIDoc
- Document changes of the intrinsics that has been landed in the past year
- Establish workflow for specification publication

Other minor fixups are
- [Fix and cleanup examples #254](https://github.com/riscv-non-isa/rvv-intrinsic-doc/pull/254)
- [Fix several mistakes in the specification #257](https://github.com/riscv-non-isa/rvv-intrinsic-doc/pull/257)
- [Fix the value of vta and vma since they are inconsistent with context #260](https://github.com/riscv-non-isa/rvv-intrinsic-doc/pull/260)
- [Fix type-o in table of RVV types #261](https://github.com/riscv-non-isa/rvv-intrinsic-doc/pull/261)

We have added utility function `vcreate` for tuple type creation. Although this addition is not succinct, but this syntax sugar allows users to create their desired tuple type value in a single line and not multiple lines of `vset`.
- [Add vcreate intrinsics for creating tuple type values #256](https://github.com/riscv-non-isa/rvv-intrinsic-doc/pull/256)

## Remaining actions before specification freeze

The specification is now in the first round of internal review among tech chairs. After the review and we have gathered consensus within this task group, we will declare specification freeze and go through the public review period. Following by that we will have a ratification ready specification.

## AOB

### Backporting specification updates to the v0.12 branch

Rich: There seems not to have a description for the behaviors of the floating-point rounding mode intrinsics. How they would interact with the existing C language feature.

eop: There is a side note under the latest specification.

Rich: Since I am working on the LLVM 17 release and the release is referring to the [v0.12 branch](https://github.com/riscv-non-isa/rvv-intrinsic-doc/tree/v0.12.x), please backport this note to the branch.

eop: Will do. Thank you for mentioning.

### TUMU variant

Rich: Regarding the TUMU variants, can anyone think of an example I can refer to in the document I am writing?

Kito & eop: The TUMU variant exists because we want the intrinsics to be functional complete and let the users leverage the V extension in the C language level. We can't come up with a use case immediately but that should not be the reason we see it as redundant and do not provide users the possibility to specify `TUMU` policy.

Rich: Regarding the TUMU variants, I think the intrinsics is doing something extra here with the extra `maskedoff` parameter here. Looking at `vadd` we have a `maskedoff` parameter in it `TUMU` variant, and `vmacc` does not.

Kito: I think this confusion may come from the language we are writing in. In C langage we cannot express both read and write at the right-hand side, while in assmebly, the assmebly of `vadd.vv vd, vs2, vs1`, `vd` keeps tail / masked-off elements and also serve as the destination register.

Note after meeting: The maskedoff parameter is forwarded to the destination register, which will overlap with the return value of the computation of `vs2` and `vs1` parameter. We should clarify this in the intrinsics specification.
