Date: October 30th, 2023

Time: 22:00 UTC+8

Attendee: Attendees: eop Chen, Nick Knight, Jim Lin, Anton Sidorenko, Michal Terepeta, Grigory Okhotnikov, Yixuan Chen, Andrey Matyukov

## Remaining actions for the v1.0 specification

Currently there are no remaining pull requests left for the v1.0 specification. We have landed all changes we planned (seen necessary) for the v1.0.

Till the date of this meeting minutes, eop has sented a [request for reviewal](https://lists.riscv.org/g/apps-tools-software/topic/request_for_review_on_the_rvv/102270046?p=,,,20,0,0,0::recentpostdate/sticky,,,20,2,0,102270046,previd%3D1698697462901213981,nextid%3D1675859877061933855&previd=1698697462901213981&nextid=1675859877061933855) to the Apps and Tools HC. After the reviewal cycle, we will then proceed to request signoff for freeze.

## Fuzz-test generator for the RVV intrinsics released by SiFive

SiFive is happy to release a fuzz test generator for the RVV C intrinsics.

https://github.com/sifive/riscv-vector-intrinsic-fuzzing

Feel free to contact <eop.chen@sifive.com> if you have any questions.

## Items after v1.0 ratification

We have some items in our sight for what to do after the v1.0 ratification.

### C operator for the RVV types

Issue: [rvv-intrinsic-doc#13](https://github.com/riscv-non-isa/rvv-intrinsic-doc/issues/13), [riscv-c-api-doc#50](https://github.com/riscv-non-isa/riscv-c-api-doc/issues/50)

We have went through this issue in the previous (2023/10/03) meeting. There were no pushoff from this feature.

Motivations for this feature are like:
- Currently in the LLVM compiler the intrinsics go through its own path of lowering to the code generation. We don't have much coverage of speculation when `vl=VLMAX`. Using C operators can allow us to reuse existing speculations to general LLVM IR.
- These operators can smoothen the short-term transition from existing SIMD library to RVV. Although to leverage the full capability of RVV, SIMD libraries will often need to a full rewrite. This is still a move that helps the RVV ecosystem to grow.

Currently JianJian GUAN who raised the issue has also created a patch in LLVM to support this. He will create a proposal of this feature in the near future.

### Fixed-length attribute

Issue: [rvv-intrinsic-doc#176](https://github.com/riscv-non-isa/rvv-intrinsic-doc/issues/176)

This is another feature that will help us port SIMD libraries to RVV. And again, should likely be another short-term approach before going through a re-write.

Currently Craig Topper has pushed a patch in LLVM for initial proof-of-concept for this. We will look into completing this feature.

### Remaining other vector extensions

Other vector extensions we don't officially have an intrinsic specification are:
- BF16 ([rvv-intrinsic-doc#233](https://github.com/riscv-non-isa/rvv-intrinsic-doc/issues/223))
- Vector crypto ([development branch of intrinsic spec](https://github.com/riscv-non-isa/rvv-intrinsic-doc/tree/eopc/vector-crypto) with support in LLVM)
- NTLH ([development branch of intrinsic spec](https://github.com/riscv-non-isa/rvv-intrinsic-doc/tree/eopc/ntlh-interface) with support in LLVM)

eop will pick up these works and approach to formalize them.

### Array subscript

Issue: [rvv-intrinsic-doc#238](https://github.com/riscv-non-isa/rvv-intrinsic-doc/issues/238)

As tuple types are implemented into the compiler. An compile time constant size of array objects should also be implementable into the C language too.

Request has been raised in the issue and as long as we are backed with a concrete demand, this is a feature we are looking to support too.

### Tuple type across hardware restriction

Issue: [rvv-intrinsic-doc#290](https://github.com/riscv-non-isa/rvv-intrinsic-doc/issues/290)

This feature was raised during the creation of currently supported tuple types. Tuple types across hardware restrictions may be required by complex math functions that may be returning two LMUL=8 values.

As long as we are backed with a concrete demand, this is a feature we are looking to support too.

### Extended discussion

Thanks to Nick, he raised two other items that was missed in the presentation slide.

#### User-defined sizeless structures

Although we will do deeper into the C langauge standard to enable this, but we should not be pushed back because Arm has failed to approach this.

Motivations of this features are:
- Code in Google Eigen build structures with vectors
- This would be good to port SIMD ISA to RVV

#### Exception handling intrinsics

We are missing intrinsics that models `vxsat` and `fflag`. This is indeed corner case, but we at least need to leave design document for users interested to implement them into the compiler.

#### Scalar floating-point intrinsics

We now have rounding mode intrinsics for the vector floating-point computations. The scalar floating-point computations should also have intrinsics to control them as well.

## AOB

No other businesses were discussed in this meeting.
