Date: Febuary 02, 2023

Time: 23:00 UTC+8

Attendees: eop Chen (coordinator), Kito Cheng, Nick Knight, Trevor Gale, Christoph Mullner, Anton Afansyev, Roger Ferrer Ibanez, JojoR

## Current status towards ratification

eop:
During this month (from the last meeting to the current), I have implemented changes both in the specification [0, 1, 2, 3] and in the upstream LLVM compiler. The changes cover all the breaking changes in compatibility to what we label as the v0.10.

Before the next open meeting, the featuers that are targeted to address are:
- Add an adaptor header for transition from v0.10 to v0.11
- Add tuple-type as primitive type for segment load/store

Currently, target for the next-next open meeting will be to address features:
- Add intrinsics to model rounding mode in floating-point and fixed-point
- Polish the out-going documents

[0] https://github.com/riscv-non-isa/rvv-intrinsic-doc/pull/182

[1] https://github.com/riscv-non-isa/rvv-intrinsic-doc/pull/185

[2] https://github.com/riscv-non-isa/rvv-intrinsic-doc/pull/186

[3] https://github.com/riscv-non-isa/rvv-intrinsic-doc/pull/189

## Implementation status for LLVM 16

eop: I think it is best to not extend another public release of LLVM a version of RVV intrinsics that will be overwritten. Standing upon this, LLVM 16 is going to support what will be expected as the v1.0.

Note: In the RISC-V LLVM bi-weekly sync-up in the next hour, Philip was mildly opposed to having such a big change being "backported" into LLVM 16, because the full set of patches did not catch up the date of the branch out. However I (eop) think that this is what we have to live with because again, the last thing we want is to have some to-be-removed intrinsics be living in another LLVM release.

## Fixed length attribute

Currently Craig Topper have implemented an option in LLVM [0] of implementing an option indicating a VLS setting in RVV. The specification need to document this down.

[0] [https://reviews.llvm.org/D142144](https://reviews.llvm.org/D142144)

### Extended discussion

Nick: Is it possible for this to be included in the v1.0?

eop: I think it depends on the resource we have. I have my hands on the targeted features listed in the previous topic. Craig has now covered the implementation part in LLVM, but we also need a textual description to be merged into the specification.

Kito: Well I think we can discuss more than one possibility here. What Craig is doing, is providing an attribute directly setting RVV to VLS. This makes compiled objects non-portable.

However in another case, providing VLS data-types like `int32x4_t` may be another possibility. With this kind of simd data-type, compilation in RVV can be flexible on this. With VLEN of 0, the compiler can emit scalar codegen for these types. For VLEN of 64, the compiler can emit vector code with LMUL of 2 for these types. For VLEN greater or equal, the compiler can emit vector code with LMUL of 1 for these types.

---

Nick: Another important note to this I think, is that whatever we come up here, I think it is important that the existing intrinsics function signature we have now can be reused through this new feature.

Kito: Yes, the concern is that how are we bringing this SIMD data type (or concept) to the current interface. Moreover, what should we deal with the `vl` parameter, which all intrinsics share.

Nick: Yes, that is a good point. I think I will need more thought on this.

## `vsetvlmax` causing sub-optimal code gen

Nick: Another comment from the Google Highway folks is that `vsetvlmax` is causing sub-optimal code gen for RISC-V.

Side-note: The side effect removal patch is now createed: https://reviews.llvm.org/D143220. So the problem should be resolved in the near future.

Nick: Furthermore I think we can just remove `vsetvlmax`.

## Non-API related discussions

The rest of the time are off-topic discussions that are not directly related to the intrinsic API.

Worth noting is that Trevor was asking if there is a roadmap on CodeGen improvement in the upstream LLVM RISC-V compiler because currently the codegen is sub-optimal in a performance perspective.

Nick suggests that it would be best (and more actionable) to submit any code snippet that indicates the sub-optimal codegen of the compiler.
