Date: Febuary 23, 2023

Time: 23:00 UTC+8

Attendees: eop Chen (coordinator), Kito Cheng, Andy Chiu, Mihail Popa, Anton Afanasyev, Rafael Sene, Josh Hayford

## Notified OpenCV for the LLVM 16 release

eop:
Under issue thread under opencv/opencv [0], a heads-up was given to the OpenCV community about the up-coming release of LLVM 16 [1]. I will follow up if they need any help in transiting to the new intrinsic interface.

[0] [[RFC][RISCV] Possible incompatible change for RVV intrinsics #22608
](https://github.com/opencv/opencv/issues/22608)

[1] [llvm/llvm-project: clang/docs/ReleaseNotes.rst](https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project/blob/release/16.x/clang/docs/ReleaseNotes.rst#risc-v-support)

## Current status towards ratification

eop:
During the time between the previous meeting and the current, we have released the compatible header to help user transit from the v0.10 intrinsics to v0.11 [0]. The goal before next meeting (3/20) would be to implement the tuple-type for segment load/store (or if still not do-able, give a wrap-up for the item).

Here (pg. 3 in the slide [1]) are the lists of the current items done and planned. Currently we are still on-track to what we have planned.

[0] [riscv-non-isarvv-intrinsic-doc: auto-generated/rvv-v0p10-compatible-headers](https://github.com/riscv-non-isa/rvv-intrinsic-doc/tree/master/auto-generated/rvv-v0p10-compatible-headers)

[1] [Road to RVV C Intrinsic API v1.0 - 2023/02/23](https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1dPtqH7wIrKHwVkZ7swnqTfDqNa4KqYLlVmk32exb6SY/edit?usp=sharing)

## Tuple-type for segment load/store

Nick:
Historically the tuple-types were originally a part of the RVV intrinsics, but implementation difficulty in the LLVM stopped us from doing so. Generally I think this is a better API and the right way to do this.

Also the GCC folks, because they can support this, they were trying to implement these API-s in the GCC compiler, this ends up in an uncomfortable situation where the two compilers are mis-aligned in supported features. That is really unhealthy for the overall experience for the RVV intrinsics, having a separate extension that only one of the compiler supports is not something we hope to end up with.

eop:
Yes, through tracing the patches, I figured that the schedule didn't allow us to stop and come up with a more well-rounded approach, so the feature was kind of dropped and we settled for a more simpler one, which is the current interface.

Richard:
Yes, it was too much places in the Clang front-end we needed to change and there were many places not well-defined.

Nick:
eop are you able to leverage Kai's work to do this? Are you going to re-do the implementation or is this brand new?

eop:
I have my hands on the abandoned patch by Kai, I am working on to see how I can revive it and see what can I do more for it.

Kito:
Just some history about this, we got some push-back from the LLVM community. I guess we got more support now since another company, Rivos, is also eager to see this feature land LLVM. So hopefully the same approach will recieve different feedbacks this time, otherwise another approach from this will probably require a decent amount of work.

### How to deal with the existing API after the tuple-type ones are introduced?

Nick:
How do we deal with the existing segment load/store API-s after the tuple-type intrinsics are introduced?

Kito:
Personally I would like to remove the old ones. I guess eop could also provide compatible header to help user to transit the the new API smoothly. I guess that is probably the way to do so.

Nick:
When you say the compatible header, is it something we are going to add the upstream? Or is it something published under rvv-intrinsic-doc and users can just take it if they want it.

Kito:
In LLVM, adding a header into the source code may be possible, but since GCC never implemented the current API, it probably doesn't make sense to add this into GCC releases. So I think we will provide a copy inside the document repo.

Nick:
For the undisturbed versions of the vector load intrinsics, you will fuse the pass-through argument with the to-be-loaded vector register is that correct?

eop:
Yes, the simplification will also be included during this tuple-type feature.

### Some extended discussions

In the meeting, we recapped on the current draft of the RISC-V vector ABI [0], which is implemented into LLVM (pg. 5 and 6 in the slide [1]). We have drawn to a conclusion that the details of how the vector registers is passed and returned will be delegated to the PS-ABI task group. Here (in the RVV intrinsic specification), we will define interfaces and interfaces only and leave the implementation details to them (because we may even explore a more register-efficient ABI than the current draft, like sorting the passed registers by LMUL to avoid wasted registers due to alignment).

The tuple-type feature can probably be splitted to several sub-items.

The least we need is the tuple-type intrinsics of the segment load/store, accompanied with `vget` and `vset` for the tuple-types. One step forward we can have `vcreate` for the tuple-types. To support more natural usage for the tuples, we can have array subscripts for the type.

Nick mentioned that the array subscript will be helpful when porting libraries like Eigen. We will probably revisit this in the future when we are implementing VLS intrinsics for RVV.

Another thing came about that if the relaxation in the LLVM compiler is accepted, we can explore more on enabling structures that contains scalable vector, but we probably have to catch up on this based on the paused work of Richard Sandiford.
