Date: December 4th, 2023

Time: 23:00 UTC+8

Attendee: Attendees: eop Chen, Anton Sidorenko, Kito Cheng, Issac Chute, Michal Terepeta, Roger Ferrer Lbanez, Guo Ren, Jim Lin

## Remaining actions for the v1.0 specification

The document "Acceptance Criteria for RVV C intrinsics API v1.0" [0] is drafted. This will be formally presented to the Tech Chairs for declaring the specification as "Frozen".

[0] [Acceptance Criteria for RVV C intrinsics API v1.0](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1mnL47GXbz022DcJgdBBYyCKtwf44PHtePXQEadMCDqM/edit?usp=sharing)

## Ongoing pull requests

### Add intrinsics for xtheadvector extension #298

eop: As stated in my comment [0], I propose to host a section under the README leaving the specification completely for RVI ratified extension intrinsics.

[0] [eop's comment in #298](https://github.com/riscv-non-isa/rvv-intrinsic-doc/pull/298#issuecomment-1832068674)

No further opposition or discussion was made during the meeting since Christoph and Joshua did not attend. Will follow-up with them to reosolve this issue.

### Define BFloat16 intrinsics #293

Latest comments in the specification PR has been addressed. No more request for modification since.

eop: LLVM implementation is right now work in progress on my side.

Kito: GCC implementation is under reviewal.

### Proposal of the intrinsics for vector crypto #234

Given that upstream toolchains have support to the vector crypto instructions and vector crypto intrinsics. The remaining action here will be to address latest comments and seek to land the PR into the main branch.

On the other hand, removing the experimental guard for the vector crypto "extension" [0] suppose to be a separate matter to the experimental guard for the vector crypto intrinsics. Given that we don't have a determined process yet for future intrinsic specification release, the upstream toolchain should still guard the intrinsics with experimental tags.

[0] https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project/pull/69000

## Future release cycles after v1.0

Discussion continues from the vector crypto to defining a process for future releases after v1.0.

eop proposed that give GCC has a longer release cycle, the next TG targeting future releases should take this into consideration and be in-sync with them.

GCC has a 4 stage development process (deprecated into 3 now). Empiracally there is a 7-month duration for stage 1 which accomodates feature changes. A general rule of thumb is that features of the intrinsics should be planned and at least a POC should be submitted to the GCC mailing list within stage 1. With the remaining time for implementors to support them within stage 3.

LLVM has a more frequent release, which will require a branch-out in the specification as a pointer of reference for the releases.

Generally the implemented features should be in-sync for GCC and LLVM during the GCC release and LLVM release during March ~ April.

## AOB

N/A
